CSS Syntax and Structure

CSS Basics: Understanding How to Style Your Website

Imagine your website is like a blank canvas, and HTML is the basic sketch. CSS is the vibrant paint that brings your sketch to life, adding colors, textures, and depth. Just as an artist carefully chooses brushes and colors, CSS lets you decide how every element of your webpage will appear, from the fonts to the layout.

In this tutorial, we will explain the basic syntax of CSS, including how to write CSS rules with selectors, properties, and values.
What is CSS?

CSS stands for Cascading Style Sheets. CSS syntax consists of rules written in a specific format to apply styles to HTML elements. Understanding the basic syntax of CSS is the foundation for controlling the appearance of HTML elements.
Structure of a CSS Rule

A CSS rule consists of three main parts:

    Selector: Identifies the HTML element you want to style.

    Property: Defines what aspect of the element's appearance you want to change (e.g., color, font size, margin).

    Value: Specifies the setting you want to apply to that property.

Here's an example of a CSS rule structure:

selector {
  property: value;
}

CSS Selectors

In CSS, curly brackets {} are used to define the block of styles that will be applied to the selected HTML elements. After specifying a selector, the styles for that selector are written inside the curly brackets. Each style rule inside the brackets consists of a property and a value.
Example 1: Basic Element Selector

Let’s say you're designing a blog page, and you want all your paragraph text to be blue to match the brand colors. You would write:

p {
  color: blue;
}

In this case, p is the selector (targeting all paragraph elements), color is the property, and blue is the value.
Example 2: Class Selectors

Class selectors target all elements with a specific class attribute. They begin with a period (.) followed by the class name. For example:

.classname {
  color: blue;
}

This would target any element with the class classname and change its color to blue.
Example 3: ID Selectors

ID selectors target a single element with a specific id attribute. Unlike class selectors, which can be used on multiple elements, an ID should be unique to one element on the page. ID selectors start with a hash (#), followed by the ID name. For example:

#idname {
  color: blue;
}

This targets the element with the ID idname and changes its text color to blue.
CSS Properties and Values

In CSS, a property is an aspect of the element you want to style. Common properties include:

    color

    font-size

    background-color

    margin

Each property must be followed by a colon (:), and then a value that defines the desired style. You must end each rule with a semicolon (;) to separate it from other rules.
Example 4: Font Size Property

font-size: 16px;

This sets the text size to 16 pixels.
Example 5: Multiple Properties in a Rule

You can apply multiple properties to the same element within a single CSS rule. Here’s an example using the h1 selector:

h1 {
  color: red;
  font-size: 24px;
  margin-bottom: 10px;
}

This rule:

    Changes the text color to red,

    Sets the font size to 24px,

    Adds a 10px margin below each h1 element.

Real-World Example: Styling a Homepage

Imagine you’re a web developer at CodeCrafters, and you’re tasked with giving their homepage a fresh, modern look using CSS. Here’s how you could write your CSS rules:
Example 6: Styling with Element Selectors, Class Selectors, and ID Selectors

    Element Selector - Targeting all h1 and h2 elements on the page:

h1, h2 {
  color: blue;
}

This rule will make all h1 and h2 headings blue.

    Class Selector - Targeting elements with a class of intro:

.intro {
  font-size: 20px;
}

This rule will make all text inside elements with the class intro 20px in size.

    ID Selector - Targeting an element with the ID of header:

#header {
  background-color: green;
}

This rule will apply a green background to the element with the ID header.
Summary of Selectors

    Element Selectors: Style specific HTML tags (e.g., h1, p).

    Class Selectors: Apply the same style to multiple elements with the same class (e.g., .intro).

    ID Selectors: Style a single unique element with a specific ID (e.g., #header).

The below CSS targets elements that both have the menu and the closed class as part of the class attribute ie class="menu closed"
.menu.closed {
  transform: translateX(-100%);
}


By combining these selectors, you can control the design and layout of your web page in a flexible and efficient way.
Conclusion

In this tutorial, we’ve explored how CSS can be used to control the visual elements of your webpage. By understanding these fundamentals, you can start experimenting with web designs and turning your creative ideas into reality through code. As you become more comfortable with CSS, you'll be able to create more engaging and visually appealing content for your websites.